targeted-phasing-consensus.sh
-------------------------

The ``targeted-phasing-consensus.sh`` script runs phasing on a subset of aligned PacBio Reads of Insert (CCS reads) corresponding to a gene or region of interest, and generates a Quiver-based consensus sequence for each phase.

This workflow was designed for experiments utilizing long fragment target capture, such as the upcoming 6 kb capture protocol using Roche NimbleGen’s<sup>&reg;</sup> SeqCap EZ Enrichment<sup>&reg;</sup>.

Installing
----------

Download these two files into the same directory:

```sh
% wget https://github.com/lhon/targeted-phasing-consensus/raw/master/targeted-phasing-consensus.sh
% wget https://github.com/lhon/targeted-phasing-consensus/raw/master/faidx.zip
```

Running `targeted-phasing-consensus.sh` requires having [SMRT Analysis 2.3](http://pacbiodevnet.com) installed.

Running
-------

1. In SMRT Portal, use the `RS_ReadsOfInsert_Mapping` protocol with the following parameters to generate and align single best estimate Reads of Insert per molecule:
   - Minimum Full Passes: 0
   - Minimum Predicted Accuracy: 75

2. The name of the reference, `aligned_reads.bam`, and `input.fofn` from step 1 can then be used for the phasing step. `source` the SMRT Analysis environment, and then run `targeted-phasing-consensus.sh` on a targeted region:

  ```sh
% source /opt/smrtanalysis/etc/setup.sh
% ./targeted-phasing-consensus.sh chr17 41243000 41244200 BRCA1 hg19_M_sorted /opt/smrtanalysis/common/jobs/087/087197/data/aligned_reads.bam /opt/smrtanalysis/common/jobs/087/087197/input.fofn
```

  In the example above, we are looking at a subset of `BRCA1` on `chr17` between positions `41243000` and `41244200`. `hg19_M_sorted` was the name of the reference in SMRT Portal, and the paths to `aligned_reads.bam` and `input.fofn` from job 87197 were specified. The results and intermediate output will be placed in the `BRCA1` subdirectory.

Outputs
-------

Some relevant files in the output directory:

- `subset.bam` is the subset of the full bam file containing reads mapping to the region of interest
- `phase.out` is the output from the `samtools phase` command. Successfully phased regions are delineated by the `PS` (phase set) marker. `M1` describes detected heterogyzote SNPs that passed the filter.
- `consensus0.fasta` and `consensus1.fasta` are the consensus sequences for each phase, generated by Quiver
- `nucmer.snps` shows the SNP differences between the phases
